---
layout: post
title: The Wound Is Where The Light Enters
---


At unexpected moments we are tested by the trials and tribulations of life, at unforgettable moments our worlds are hurled upside down. At those moments we know that life as we have known will never be the same. In those moments, we come face to face with a terror too great for the human mind to comprehend. An abyss so vast that it crumbles away at our illusions, an abyss that forces us to peer deeply into that most avoided of places, our selves. We spend our days with abstract notions of who we are, complacent in the comfort of the mundane. Great sufferings awake us from this sleep; show us who we are beneath the mask. They challenge our notions; they break us down so completely that little remains. Yet somehow, by some divine miracle, we rise again from the very ashes that we have fallen into.  We become transmuted through the furnace of experience, never to be the same again.
Waking up from a strange night, I rolled over lazily in my bed on this gloomy September afternoon. I had been awoken by an even stranger phone call; it was a friend of my brother’s, and he insisted that I give the phone to my parents. Something just didn’t feel right; I had an uneasy feeling in my gut. “What happened to my brother?” I asked frantically. It was the only thing I could think to ask at that moment. There was no response, only a further insistence that I give the phone to my parents. I obliged, and waited for the verdict. Within minutes, my parents rushed over to my room. They were going to the hospital. My brother had gotten into a car accident; now he was in the emergency room. They asked me if I would join them, which even at that time impressed me as strange. Of course I would go— it was beyond my choice. I was startled, but not yet upset—at that point I did not know the severity of the accident.
We rode hurriedly to the hospital as I silently looked through the hazy windows, seeing blurs of streaking lights. It was a rainy night, with a cool humidity in the air that provided some solace. As we traveled, time seemed to be moving slowly in anticipation. We arrived at the hospital, greeted by my brother’s friend. Their misty eyes and look of desperation made it clear that they had been crying, that they had witnessed some great tragedy. This is when the reality of the situation began to creep in; it became clear that something very serious had occurred. We walked together to my brother in a nervous excitement. He was laying on a hospital bed with a bloodied bandage wrapped around his head, his body covered in cuts and bruises—both of his eyes were closed, bruised from impacts that he sustained on his head. The sight of this struck me so unexpectedly and so severely that my mind went blank. I was stunned, paralyzed by fear and disbelief. How could this be? It was all so incomprehensible to me at that moment; I had just spoken to him on the phone the other day. Yet here he was, hanging onto life, approaching death. There was a tube attached to his head, a contraption that drained fluids building up in his crushed skull. He had suffered a traumatic brain injury; a left turn on a freshly wet road had sent him into an opposing lane, where two oncoming cars struck him. Later we were sued for minor damages caused to one of the other victims— an older gentleman that had a broken collarbone. Indignant rage filled me when I heard this. How could someone be so inhuman, so uncompassionate and unwilling to forgive a family and their traumatized son on their darkest night? I had always urged him to wear a seat belt, yet on this day he did not—it impacted us all dearly. I was told that he was found mangled on the passenger’s side; the impact had been so strong. After hitting the side glass with his head, he seized for an unknown period of time, furthering the damage. I only hope that he went unconscious on impact, though noone knew for sure.
I was lead to the waiting room; it was dark in there, so very dark. I sat down and unable to restrain myself, began to cry tears of bitter confusion and pain. A nurse walked in, and seeing my state sat down next to me and gently rubbed my back. It was futile, only my outpour of emotion was providing me any relief in this dark abyss. As I sat there, my life unraveled before my eyes. Somehow, all that I had valued seemed now ridiculous to me. The pettiness of my constructed identity and my long held beliefs became so blindingly obvious in that moment. Up to that point, my life had been lived as if death was not real, as if it was something that only happened to other people. Now I saw the fragility of life, how one moment laughing and smiling, a person could in the very next be comatose, dangling by a thread. I lost all sense of control— my habitual illusions were dispelled, I knew then how powerless I was. I saw the profound value of life directly, something so precious that nothing could ever equal it in significance. I saw the emptiness of my striving for money, material possessions and other cultural conditionings that until that point had only been functioning on a subconscious level. These underlying motives came to light, and vanished like a mirage realized. Money could not buy life, and if this was to be my brother’s death, I could do nothing to stop it. No one could, not even the doctors—they helped to be sure, but they were impotent in the midst of such severed brain damage. All we could do was wait, it was the most helpless I have ever felt. I had been living a fantasy life, where I had valued trivialities and forgotten to appreciate the important things. I had somehow thought that my brother would always be around, but I now saw how transient this life is. How short and beautiful it is, so short that we can go through a whole life and miss most of it. So beautiful that if we took even a moment to reflect we would see. So priceless that no amount of silver or gold can ever buy it back.
I was terrified, I begged, I pleaded—for my brother’s life. I wished that it had been me instead of him, so that I wouldn’t have to see him lying there broken. I realized how much I loved him, and how much his presence meant to me. This was obscured in the past by arguments, fights and other brotherly pastimes, but underneath this current he had always been precious to me—the prospect of his possible death had made this clear. What I would have given in that moment to speak to him, how important it seemed at that very moment, when just a day before he was taken for granted. Humans are strange creature; we are often indifferent to things we hold dear and only come to realize what’s important when it’s missing. It’s as if we are desensitized to the blessings we have in this life because of their nearness. Because they are so constantly in front of our eyes they often remain unnoticed.
Sometimes the veil is parted, for only an instant, and we see the truth of our lives all at once. How could I not have seen how valuable and precious life was, how it could be taken at any instant—with no hesitation? I was told that he had a slim chance of survival, and with that knowledge a part of me died. A large part of my personality was dependent on my brothers presence, who was I now? We had grown up together, molded each other into the people we became. We had influenced each other all through our lives, always sticking together against the harshness of the world. Now it seemed that this would all be taken away, and I would now be utterly alone.
The next three or so days were surreal, I went through processes of remembering and forgetting the accident. I went through the vivid scenes in my mind, replayed them until they were burned into my soul. I cried profusely for these few days, any sudden remembrance would launch me back into tears. I withdrew from the world, becoming apathetic to all my previous worries and cares. The image of the bloody bandage kept flashing in my mind, tormenting me relentlessly. How fragile he was laying there, how very mortal he was. My mom was emotionally wrecked, I remember one morning hearing what sounded like hysterical laughter coming from downstairs, but it was not laughter—just the gasping and whimpering of painful tears. The tears of a mother who felt she had lost her son. After the accident was first time I heard my father crying, and in the many months to come I would hear the second. But yet even during the darkest hours there were rays of hope. We held onto this hope as if it could save us, and it did. I remember reading about the accident on a news article, and how cold and indifferent his name was written on that page. As if he was just a name, another twenty-something who got into an accident, yet he was so much more than that to me. It made me wonder how many times I had read about a tragedy, unconcerned and unaware that there were people out there crying for this person, that there were people that cared very deeply. I read and reread the headline, convincing myself that this tragedy had actually happened. Little did I know of what was to come.
He was in a coma for two months, and through this period my life transformed drastically. Something completely inexplicable began happening to me after the accident— I had begun to appreciate life. Somehow, through this period of time, I found reasons to be happy, not only that but even blissful at times. A whole world opened up to me, a world of wonder, excitement and inspiration. This world was intermixed with times of sadness, though in retrospect those times were some of the happiest in my life. How could this be, how could I after such a tragedy find joy in the life I was living? They say that great suffering leads to compassion for the suffering of others, and I found this to be the case. I began to empathize with people around me, and to appreciate all of the people in my life. My heart was opened, and it poured out into the world. I became inspired to learn about this new world that I had gotten a taste of. It was a world of beauty, where the simplest object or event had deep meaning. I became drawn to inquiry into the mind, to inquiry into religious notions, to interests in things mystical—things that I had never consciously pursued. With the realization of the immanence of death, it seems I had come to a certain peace; it was a wakeup call to begin living.
I began to meditate, as if instinctually knowing it would help me most during these times, only later realizing there was not only a name, but a whole art to what I was practicing. I began to notice the little things, and find contentment in my daily life. I visited my brother throughout the time of his coma, speaking into his ears, playing music for him and sitting like a guardian—often in states of emotional upheaval. It was so peculiar that when I was in the room with him it seemed I was in another dimension, as if time ceased to exist and my mind became clear and lucid. They say that a person can hear you when they are in a coma; I found this to be accurate, or at least I wished it so. Yet, at times when I spoke particularly emotional charged words into his ears, the EEG machine monitoring his brain waves would show sudden spikes and go haywire, making alarms go off as he convulsed. Most other times his brain activity was almost non-existent, he was in a vegetative state. The human brain is a fascinating thing; how it can after essentially being crushed and scrambled by impact (as my father later described the image of my brothers brain) mend itself back into a working shape. What occurred on the days that followed the accident was nothing short of a miracle; through his bodies’ constant struggle and what seemed to me an unseen force— he remained alive.
During the many months after the accident it seemed like a hidden order became manifest in my life, where the events in my life became connected and meaningful. It was a time of profound discovery— all seemingly sparked by that fateful day. During this time I found guidance in the figure of a great teacher, a man who was jovial and inspired in the pursuit of knowledge. I remember a particularly vivid experience I had after his class one day. Gathering in a circle, a group of students and the teacher included, we spoke about the purpose and significance of life. It was a spontaneous conversation, a back and forth with sparks of curiosity and genuine inquiry all around. Ideas were flowing freely, and the discussion was filled with penetrating questions and insightful theories. As I was walking out of the room, I felt a strange sensation throughout my body. I felt my feet sink in and be pushed back by the hard floor, as if I was walking on some type of trampoline. The more I noticed this feeling the more intense it became, and I began feeling a gentle warm tingling throughout my body. It seemed that I was in a different state of perception than usual. It was effortless to walk, and my body felt as light as a feather—as if it was no longer effected by gravity. I progressed deeper and deeper into this state as I walked through the hall, until finally I reached outdoors. As I walked down along the sidewalk my perception had clearly changed. The trees were swaying vividly in still motion, with a glowing yellow halo surrounding their edges— shining brilliantly off of the bright green petals. The scene was hyper-real, as if I was more lucid than I had ever been before. I no longer had the sensation that I was the one walking, but rather felt that I was witnessing walking occurring to me. It felt like my body was moving of its own will, with me a passenger experiencing the whole spectacle. The whole experience was suffused with a tremendous sense of peace and bliss, and I felt what I would describe as a love towards nothing in particular, but rather expanding outwards towards everything. The world outside of me no longer seemed in any way separate from me—what I was seeing was me. There was no distinction between internal and external, no boundary between body and environment; it was all along a continuum. There were no thoughts occurring, just a pure experience of presence and clarity. It was one of the most beautiful experiences of my life, one that has shown me that there are multiple states of consciousness—and what we call waking ‘reality’ is just one of them. It has taught me that there is much more to life than many believe, that there are mysteries so deep that humans may never know them.

My brother’s accident was a catalyst for a process of growth that completely changed me. In time, he woke from his coma and began relearning how to move his limbs, how to speak and how to do many of the things you and I take for granted. It was a long and hard process, and my brother is very different than he once was. My whole family suffered through this experience, but it made everyone a bit kinder, a bit softer. I realize now that at that pivotal moment there was a fork in the road, one way lead to bitterness and apathy in the midst of the seeming unfairness of life, and the other lead to a deeper appreciation of life. Luckily for me the latter occurred, and to this day the events still reverberate, reminding me of the sublime beauty of this experience called life. I have found that sometimes through the deepest darkness, we find the brightest light. Even though at those moments it rarely seems so. I live now with death following me along, gently reminding me that my time will come. Rather than destroying my peace, this understanding brings me the freedom to strive towards an authentic life. A life beyond fear, one lived in constant gratitude—this is the greatest blessing. It is true that my brother will never be the same again— though I know that neither will I.